beginning to, he's learning a lot and spending a lot of time, and I think he appreciated what I was saying, that the land-grant university does have a built-in advantage if they utilize it.
During the Rudder years, the 60s, under, well, under Dr. Hutchinson, I should say, was there any other state that you all had as a kind of a model?
Well, I guess we were,
Provincial or what was the other term?
Not provincial.
We always thought we were the biggest and the best.
But there were some states that I suppose that we helped us.
We often looked at Iowa in terms of things that they did.
Cornell had some
innovative type things, and there was a lot of sharing, because we got together frequently at the national and regional levels in the southern states, North Carolina.
Surprisingly, North Carolina has the second largest extension service.
Did you know?
No.
Well, see, part of the financing formula from federal funds is based on number of farms, and they got jillions of farms because of these two- and three-acre tobacco farms.
The formula still is based on number of farms and number of farm population.
All right, let's go to the Century Study.
Share what you recall about the Century Study and the Aspirations Report and its relation to the Extension Service.
What was your part in it and anything else that you recall?
Well, I don't know.
I mean, there are some positive things in the final report, I think, about Extension and research and agriculture and so forth, but the preoccupation with the task groups, what do you call them, task forces?
was mostly with the academic programs.
And then, of course, the research.
I think a lot of the attention was that
you know, recognizing the importance of resources to get named people, you know, into the institution and this type of thing.
But Extension did not get discussed a whole lot per se, I would say.
Did Extension have any feelings about non-compulsory cohort, co-education, racial integration?
No, I don't think so.
The main thing is that we want to support.
I thought we were going to finish today.
I digress too.
One of the things that I wanted to at least touch on that affected my career a great deal, and of course I was picked up with John Hutchison, is that we were fiercely protective of the resources that came to Extension because we had studied the history of Extension.
We knew that, see, you're familiar with the history there, that there were actually two Extension services back
before the Extension Service was officially, USDA was doing some things, and the land-grant universities were doing, every state was kind of doing their own thing.
And it began to be competitive, not rational, and so forth.
And so there was a sentiment of somehow, as I call it, a shotgun marriage, to put them together, to make the Extension Service a part of the land-grant university, pick up that expertise, and then also tying it into the department, the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, which is why it's called the Cooperative Extension Service.
And at that time, there was a fierce concern, not a fierce concern, a significant concern on the part of congressional leaders
based on experience that if you just simply gave the resources to the land-grant universities, they would wind up enhancing the instructional program.
And that had happened over and over again.
So the law is very specific.
It says there shall be a specific and separate organization to, you know, do the work out in the state.
And the funds, you know, were appropriated for the purpose of that and nothing else.
The big, the early days of auditing, they were always trying to find some extension specialist teaching classes because that was a big no-no unless you had a split assignment.
But we had a big complicated reporting system and, you know, you had to account for your time and so forth.
And, you know, a lot of land grant, particularly people that haven't come up in the land grant system,
I guess couldn't understand that because it all comes out of the same pot, you know, what does it matter?
But, you know, we felt the history was such that the intent was to get it out into the field to help the farm people or the rural people or all people out in the state because they had other resources to do the instructional thing and they shouldn't be siphoned off to do research or extension.
And I think
that caused John problems, that caused me problems in terms of administering this because we had problems, for example, in many state other universities, there was a much greater use of what we call joint appointments
Well, in Iowa, Missouri, places like that, that's not such a big problem because a specialist, if he has a teaching schedule, but a teaching schedule in Texas is not very compatible with a specialist position because, as I said, unless you went out for a week at a time, you wouldn't get accomplished much.
You couldn't do much on just going out on Tuesdays or Thursdays or depending on your schedule.
Anyway, we can, I guess we'll have to do some more of this.
All right.
We'll stop there.
October, I mean November 17 and we're stopping now and we'll continue at a later date.
This is now November 20 and we are continuing.
During, Dr. Hudson was the director for 18 years?
Between 18 and 19 years, the longest serving director ever.
What were the major accomplishments of those years?
Well, I would say
Number one would be the development of the
regional research and extension centers, where there were about 11 or 12 of these established, Amarillo, Lubbock, Dallas, Overton, you know, and getting those staffed with area specialists so that the assistance that farmers and agents needed was much more available than when we used to, before that time, had to work everything out of College Station, which meant a tremendous amount of travel and that type of thing.
The other thing I think that was accomplished during that period
And a very difficult time was the integration of the two extension services.
You know, there was a black extension service emanating out of Prairie View.
Because of the Civil Rights Acts, these had to be consolidated.
Very difficult to do in some counties, as you might imagine, because they had to be housed together and share, I mean,
They had to work across racial lines.
It wasn't blacks just working with blacks and so forth.
Very difficult to acquire.
I think he did a great deal in terms of reaching or helping develop programs, part of which I was in there.
I talked about the expanded foods and nutrition program.
of getting new programs developed for trying to reach the limited income families, particularly with family living where they could make better use of what limited resources they had in terms of food, clothing, and shelter.
Even some of the poorest families do not do a good job of managing what they have.
And if you can teach them, you know, basic budgeting and setting aside money for things that are important and so forth.
There was a lot done in here.
We also started a thrust of doing more community development work instead of working more with individual farmers and so forth.
We started to work with communities as a whole to help communities improve themselves.
even to the extent where they help them organize, to attract, to develop activities, small industries, and so forth, to provide a place for the young people to stay.
We find, all our studies have shown that young people, given their brothers, would rather stay home, but they have to have opportunities.
And so we did a lot in terms of, or during his regime, did a lot to increase that.
In fact, we
Our traditional four program thrusts were agriculture, home economics, 4-H, and youth, and then we added during his administration what we call community resource development.
Right now, the community development would be less rural and more urban, wouldn't it?
Well, to some extent.
I mean, we didn't try to...
do a great deal in the larger urban areas, but I'm talking about county seat towns.
That's right, yeah.
You know, that would be classified as urban, you know, I think, what, anything over 2,500 is, and a lot of county seat towns are 5,000, 10,000, so forth.
And, but do it on a, on some, more on an area basis, because we recognize that with modern transportation and so forth,
people tended to group themselves into areas like you have the Brazos Valley and, you know, the surrounding area of Lubbock and so forth, that people tend to, you know, go certain places for medical service and so forth out of their locality, but you have a more trying to identify a viable unit to attract industry.
We did a lot of work, particularly when we helped establish, Dr. Hudson was instrumental in helping establish the Recreation and Parks Department, which did a lot of things there in trying to get people to capitalize on the historic things they had and provide objective for tourists and so forth.
On these two very important changes, about when did the integration begin?
Well, let's see.
Well, the civil rights big changes started in the late 60s with the Lyndon Johnson administration, and then they started filtering down, and we had to cope with those.
And as it developed, I was right in the middle of this because I became associate director in 71,
And this was right after, I think Mr. Rudder died in 70.
Jack Williams, I think, succeeded him, didn't he?
Yeah.
And that was the period when we really had to get to grips, not only with the
racial thing, racial segregation, but simultaneously there also came the thrust in terms of the women feeling that they are part of this.
The end of the truth was they were paid less generally.
Black agents were paid a lot less.
than white agents.
And women, generally, were paid less.
Of course, there was some explanation.
A lot of the women are in and out, more so, or stay a short time and leave and so forth.
But there was discrimination.
And shortly after I became associate director, Dr. Hutchison
So he's still working on his PhD at that time.
He had a major medical problem.
He was one of the very first people to have open heart surgery when it was still pretty crude, one of those six, seven hour operations.
And it really took a lot out of him.
I mean, it took him a long time to recover.
He never complained so much about his chest problems, but they took these long veins out of the legs and he got these horrible leg pains and everything.
And he really, really suffered a lot.
It was during that period that, you know, I had to step forward as associate director, the number two person, to deal a lot with this, particularly this integration thing.
Give some examples of some of the real successes as well as some of the real difficulties.
Well, I'm leading up to the real difficulty.
About that time, one of our
African-American agents brought suit, class action suit, against the Extension Service for past discrimination and so forth.
And then somehow another women got included in the whole package.
And it devolved on me and the personnel officer to really work with this.
And we were
trying to settle this case out of court with the support of Dr. Williams and others because obviously we didn't prefer not to go to court if we could work this out.
So we spent untold hours, Dr. Black, who was the personnel officer who got really into the statistical aspects, and we spent weeks in Washington in the Justice Department negotiating this, and we struck the best deal we could.
the ultimate thing was they wanted, you know, equal pay for everything else equal, but they didn't want to, they didn't have to say exactly, you know, you don't do it as a group as long as the, statistically now, as long as the factors that you are taking into account
can explain the differences, such as tenure, such as experience, and we held out for performance, that if you could add performance in that, you could justify.
And so we came up with a very elaborate scheme in terms of
getting this done and as long as the group was, I mean all of the things being taken, but the facts were we had to give very significant increases to these other groups, I mean to the black agents and to the
as a group, but most of that was done on a basis where we were able to get a performance review process that when that money went out, it went to the best people, the best performing people.
And that brought their average, you know, so they were competitive.
But that took a great deal of effort.
When we went to Washington,
We were weeks in conference room with the American Civil Liberties Union lawyers, and the lawyers on behalf of the people bringing the class action suit.
But we did reach a settlement out of court, and it still stands to this day.
And it was difficult, but we got through it on that basis.
And as I said, because of Dr. Hutchison's health, I had to do a whole lot of this.
As I said, I think the Extension Service expanded greatly under Dr. Hutchison's
Tenure, I think we probably added I'd say three to four hundred new professional positions.
Many of these were area specialists where we had at these various area locations we had anywhere from six to ten, twelve, fifteen area people in the various areas.
We added staff here, new program areas, community resource development, family nutrition, foods and nutrition programs, community development programs.
There was quite an expansion of staff here and there was some expansion at the county level.
And so the organization grew greatly and I think, you know, made a significant contribution to the people of the state.
Was anything phased out during those years?
No, not that I can think of.
I think it was just,
I mean, we had a very strong base in agriculture, a very strong support from agricultural groups, and we had a constant struggle like groups like the Farm Bureau saw us mainly just as serving producers.
And other things that we did, they thought took away from that.
They did not like to see us working in urban areas or, you know, doing some of these social action programs, as they called it.
And we had
you know, a struggle both in the legislature and others because they constantly came back and said, you know, we don't mind you serving as other groups but don't take away resources from us.
What were the other groups that you worked with most frequently?
Well, the Farm Bureau was a very strong presence in Texas.
The Grange was by then still existing but not a political factor.
The Farmers Union was
off in the other direction, but they tended more to, were more concerned with federal action.
I mean, they did more on the federal level for getting like farm security, you know, the loan programs and some of the services that came out of other agencies in the department, they were more activist oriented.
We always, you know, characterize our role as strictly as educational.
One of the things we always did was never to let our people handle the funds.
And if there were any funds, somebody locally would be put in charge of it.
And probably that saved us a great deal of grief because, you know, when there's money, there's always temptation.
And anyway, that was...
I think as I said he was an outstanding director and you know he was my mentor in all of this and as I said the last two or three or four years of his tenure I had to a lot fell on me in terms of running the organization and taking care of some of these special problems.
He spent a lot of time in terms of public relations work.
He was
on a first-name basis with all the governors of most of the leading legislators.
He went to their funerals, he went to, you know, they often had these appreciation days for, he never missed those, you know, whether it was for a remote West Texas, and he was usually the only representative from Texas A&M that would participate in these.
Now, some of the more, you know, important people, other university people would participate,
He was known in Austin, I mean, there's no question about it, and he could go up and down the street or down the halls of the legislature, the Capitol, and everybody greeted him and so forth.
Which of our local legislators during Dr. Hutchinson's time deserved the most credit for being supportive?
Well, of course, on the national level, Olin Teague was very supportive.
I mean, he was, in fact, I remember myself working with him, talking about
You know, a few years later, as you're aware of, after we went through this agonizing process of integration of the services, then Congress came around and provided special funds to the 1890 institutions to do extension and research work, which tended to resegregate.
And I had a visit with him in Washington one time.
I said, you know, to me, this whole matter is we ought to, the objective ought to be to reach the point, when I'm dealing with you,
I shouldn't even have to think about your color.
I mean, you're just a person.
I said, that's the ultimate objective.
When you do the other thing, again, you're counting, you know, black people, audiences, and so forth.
And he agreed with me thoroughly.
He said, but Dan, if I or any other congressman
You know, even hinted in this direction, we politically did.
I mean, you know, you just had to go along with it or you wouldn't be a player, and I had to accept that, you know, and it's probably true.
What about state legislate, our local state legislators who deserve the most credit?
Well, run me by some names.
They turned over pretty rapidly, but they were supportive.
Bill Moore?
Bill Moore was supportive.
Bill was difficult to work with, but...
When it came down to, you know, what, A&M always got, he represented A&M very well.
I think he was more concerned with the university than with us as such, but, you know, we were part of the package.
And help me remember the name of the house member who later was a Justice of Peace downtown.
I don't know who you were saying.
I can see his face.
Went to the Bryan Presbyterian Church.
Mm-hmm, yeah.
Oh, boy.
They turned over pretty rapidly.
Who were the key state legislators in that time to get things done?
Well, Gus Mucher.
Gus Mucher was a big friend of the Extension Service.
From Brenham?
Yeah.
He had been county judge there and he was, I guess,
second, I'd say, maybe the most powerful person, but he, Dr. Hutchinson worked, had a good relationship with him.
And he was usually, he was Speaker of the House, well, I guess,
He was probably chairman of the Appropriations Committee, then became speaker, and when it came down to, as we would say, Licklog, he was there for extension service and for the university.
And President Rudder and President Williams both supportive?
Oh, yes.
I'd say so, yeah.
Rudder probably understood extension better, but he had, of course, he wanted to build up the university.
Williams required a little education but he came along pretty well I think in terms of understanding.
Were there, as you look back now, were there any opportunities we missed during those years?
Were there any things we might have done, could have done, should have done?
No, I guess one of the things we had going for us in those days was the general
support that higher education was enjoying during the Connelly years, and I guess those were the top years.
That was in the 60s, let's say.
And Briscoe was agriculture, you know, that type of thing.
Smith, even though he was from West Texas Lubbock, always was very supportive.
And then there was the guy from Waco, the Democrat governor later on.
He was in for, between Clements, I think, at four years.
Baylor Mann.
Yeah, yeah.
Oh, boy.
Okay.
He was supportive.
I mean, all of them.
And Price Daniel?
Well, that goes back a little further, doesn't it?
Oh.
No, it wasn't Price Daniel that I'm thinking about.
Then Dr. Huston retires when?
He retires in about 74-ish, 75-ish.
Do you succeed him?
No.
Dr. Kunkel, Dean Kunkel, was named as acting director.
But he totally depended on me to continue operating it as I had been under that.
And he didn't ever move into the desk.
He just had the title.
And that brings me to, I guess, my appointment to director in 1976.
As I had indicated earlier, and I guess I had gotten very imbued with this, there was a continuous struggle within the university, particularly within the College of Agriculture department heads who felt
that they wanted a lot more control of the extension specialist.
And up to that time, Dr. Hutchinson had been pretty successful in maintaining.
We went along.
At one time, they weren't even housed with the departments.
Earlier, they went along with housing, which I think was a wonderful thing because, you know, if you're in horticulture, you know, it's a lot easier to communicate if you're in the same building and so forth.
And if the extension person is out, it's, you know, you can get the research or the professor or somebody.
you know help with questions and this type of thing and so there was a quite a struggle I won't name names but there were several department heads who not only you know wanted they wanted the budget so to speak I mean you know but as you know in your administrative position you ain't got nothing unless you got the budget control and they wanted simply to have a budget and then you know they would decide you know what how to allocate it in terms of extension specialists and
Dr. Hutchinson was powerful enough to, I think, pretty well stop this, but that issue pretty much came to a head, I guess, with my appointment.
A lot of, there was extreme support, from my viewpoint, from the field.
I mean, people had seen how I'd come up and come through the ranks.
You know, that's always, you know, people like to see that type of thing.
I particularly had strong support
from the home economic staff who always felt they were, expression I won't express, but sucking something else.
And they saw me as somebody who recognized their significant role, because people don't realize we had 300 or 400 professional home economists, almost as many as in agriculture, and the youth people and some of these other people.
But a number of the department heads under the leadership of one or two of them
you know, really were pushing more to try to get a department head, which often happens, a department head becomes the head of the Extension Service Experiment Station, and it really got to be a struggle.
So they had to, they appointed, and I really thought I wasn't going to get it because of the forces that were arrayed to the other side here at the university.
They appointed a search committee, a large search committee,
to go through this, as you know how they go, worked for six to eight months and they had, they publicly, it was at that time it became necessary to advertise all positions.
They had 48 applications for the position, many from out of state, quite a few from in-state, some surprising ones from in-state.
The committee deliberated, it was composed of both extension people, field people, as well as university people from other parts of the College of Agriculture and so forth.
Anyway, they came down to eight names and said, this is why we can sift it down.
Turned it over to the Board of Regents and said, this is it.
And the forces were operating, I think, between the two camps.
Dr. Kunkel took an absolutely neutral stance.
He knew he saw the struggle.
And the Board of Regents personally interviewed all eight, the top eight.
They spent about an hour with each one, which is surprising.
I mean, as much a responsibility as they had.
And as I said, I wasn't particularly, you know, I was expecting a decision in the other direction.
But we had a lot of friends among the Board of Regents.
I think a particular one I'd have to point to is Lola Smith.
You remember that name?
Lola Smith.
She was the first, one of the first women.
I forget who pointed her.
Smith probably did.
I don't know.
I can't remember.
I'd have to look at the...
But she was a homemaker from out in the Lubbock area and an extremely respected person.
The women
that homemakers out in the counties are organized into home demonstration.
They were called home economics clubs.
They have a county group, and they had a state group, and she became president of the state group.
And she was very much interested in the home economics programs and so forth, and to this day, I feel she played a role in my selection.
But anyway, after they interviewed all eight people, I was named director.
As you recall the actual interview with the board, what seemed to be their deepest interests, their greatest concerns?
Well, you've been through that.
It's hard to remember because you're very tense.
It's an extremely emotional or tense, stressful period.
But they spent about an hour.
But I think it had to do with future directions of the Extension Service.
They didn't ask you any one-of-a-kind questions?
No, I don't think so.
But they interviewed all eight people.
And about an hour after the interviews were completed, Conkel called me in and said, you're it.
Did anybody give you any clear directions, marching orders?
No, not particularly.
And you at that time were to report to, as the new director, you were to report?
At that time it was Conkle.
Conkle was dean and at that time under Jack Williams administration extension service was under, as part of the College of Agriculture.
Harry Conkle was dean of agriculture.
And he had three major subordinates, the experiment station head, director of the experiment station, and then there was an associate dean, Dr. Potts, remember that name?
R.C.
Potts?
Yeah, who was over the academics.
So Harry Kunkel was the person I reported to.
Who was the experiment station director then?
Neville Clark.
Neville.
Yeah, Neville Clark.
And Potts was the other person.
And I am a great admirer of Harry Kunkel.
as far as I was concerned, very supportive, administratively helpful, and didn't pretend that he knew all the details of extension service, so that, you know, he left that pretty well up to me, and we worked well together.
But that changed rather abruptly about a year later when the other forces, at my disappointment, when
Jarvis Miller became president.
He had, he was extremely angry or had always been angry with Dr. Kunkel because he had spent three, two or four years working in the Dominican Republic and came back and the department didn't wish to have him back and
And Dr. Kunkel made him assistant director of the experiment station or something because they didn't want him back in the department.
But anyway, Jarvis was a skillful politician and got himself named president and, you know, very hurtful to the Williams family, as you know.
Yes, yes.
And what he immediately did was take the extension service and the experiment station away from Dr. Kunkel, which was extremely painful to Dr. Kunkel because he prided himself with, you know, having the three coordinates.
And Dr. Kunkel
And I and Edward Clark were set up in a new administrative unit, had a vice chancellor for agriculture, Harry Atkinson, and O.D.
Butler was the assistant or associate vice chancellor.
And they had got grandiose new offices in the administration building, and I no longer reported to Harry Kunkel, and I reported to
to Dr. Atkinson, and we were, uh, that was the channel.
And he reported not to the campus, but to the Chancellor.
To the Chancellor.
Chancellor, who, I guess it was Jack Williams.
No, he had, I guess it was a two-way, no.
It was Williams.
Well, we were, I guess, we were still considered part of the university.
Oh.
No, I guess not.
No, we weren't.
Because Dr. Miller, one of his great campaigns was to have those report to him.
Right, right, right.
That was right.
And the forces that I said that were very interested in having
The department heads play a larger role in extension, were very supportive of Dr. Miller, and he was supportive of them.
As I said, this became evident when the difficulty started with my leaving six years later.
When the position became vacant then, there was no search committee.
There was an immediate appointment of Dr. Carpenter, who had been a department head.
That kind of gives you an indication there.
All right.
You got it?
No, I just want to.
As you began your period as the director this is 1976 what were your goals?
Well I guess one of the problems I had opportunities I saw both the training you know